- The first behavior pattern that we're going
to talk about is the observer pattern.
Now in Spring there's really one primary use case
of the observer pattern,
and that is when listening to changes
of the ApplicationContext.
And you can do that through the ApplicationListener
interface that will tell you if and when
the ApplicationContext changes.
Now this is more of an advanced topic in Spring,
and its not that often that you're going to do this.
But this is one use case of the observer pattern
in the Spring framework.
One sort of loose way that the observer pattern is used
in the Spring framework is the way JMS,
or Rabbit message listeners work.
It's a very loose interpretation cause it's
really a asynchronous call coming back,
but if you look at it logically it is
kind of the way that the observer pattern works.
So what is this observer pattern?
So first and foremost there is an object,
that's called a subject.
That maintains a list of observers,
when a notification is created based on some
state change a message is sent to the observer
that tells it that this state changed.
So it's a way to actually pass the notification,
from a parent to a list of children.
The observers themselves can then determine
if they need to act on the notification,
or throw it out based on whether it applies to them.
Now some state changes should apply to all observers,
but that's not always the case.
So by using this pattern each observer can make
it's own determination of whether the notification matters,
and all the subject needs to do is notify everyone
that a state change has occurred.
So why might we do this pattern?
One of the primary reasons of doing this,
is to reduce coupling in code paths
when you have this one-to-many dependency situations.
We see this a lot, with the way asynchronous messaging
patterns work or when we have to fan a command out,
to multiple implementations or services.
By using this pattern we can actually encapsulate
the call into one method call and that method call
then creates a notification that spins out to
multiple business services.
We do this a lot with ETL's,
we do this a lot with managing state within a system
when we're trying to run a state machine.
The object state changes will have downstream effects,
and we need to decouple that from the main application flow.
So think if for a moment if we don't have
this notifier layer?
The parent that is making the change to state
would have to know about each and every observer,
How it exists and how it's methods operate.
With the observer pattern, I only need to notify
the subject who will then notify the observers,
and the observers themselves will know how to
implement the change based on this notification.
There's also a need often to dynamically register
downstream observers, and if that exists it's
almost impossible to do this without the observer pattern.
Because then you have to handle code pass of registering,
and unregistering things and being able to manage
this state of the observers dynamically
through your main code line and that becomes
a maintenance nightmare.
So the observer pattern really provides you
the substraction layer that you need when handling
these multiple calls from a single event,
or a single state change.
So how might we go about creating this?
It's really a fairly straight forward pattern to implement,
though its a little bit convoluted to talk about.
First and foremost you create an observer interface,
then you create a subject interface
with the register and unregister,
and its important to do both the register,
and the unregister method.
That take the observer object,
as well as has a notify interface.
Again that register and unregister is important,
because throughout the life cycle of your application
an observer may need to unregister itself
based on the state change.
Or something may trigger new registrations
to occur based on state change.
So you got to have both.
So now your going to implement the interfaces
into concrete classes.
Now in the real world in Java,
we're actually not going to do any of this.
We are going to leverage 2 built in
interfaces from Java.util.
There's the observer bowl interface, and the observer.
The observer bowl is obviously our subject,
and the observer is the observer itself.
So most of the time in Java when we do this,
we're going to leverage the built in Java.util functions.
The build in Java.util interfaces,
and do the same behavior using these key interfaces.
That's the pattern in a nutshell,
and how it's used in the Spring framework.